% Part: computability
% Chapter: lambda-calculus
% Section: computable-lambda

\documentclass[../../../include/open-logic-section]{subfiles}

\begin{document}

\olfileid{cmp}{lam}{lrp}
\olsection{Computable Functions are Lambda Representable}

\begin{thm}
\ollabel{thm:computable-lambda}
Every computable partial function if representable by a lambda term.
\end{thm}

\begin{proof}
Wwe need to show that every partial computable function~$f$ is
represented by a lambda term~$\num{f}$. By Kleene's normal form
theorem, it suffices to show that every primitive recursive function
is represented by a lambda term, and then that the functions so
represented are closed under suitable compositions and unbounded
search. To show that every primitive recursive function is represented
by a lambda term, it suffices to show that the initial functions are
represented, and that the partial functions that are represented by
lambda terms are closed under composition, primitive recursion, and
unbounded search.
\end{proof}

We will use a more conventional notation to make the rest of the proof
more readable. For example, we will write $M(x, y, z)$ instead of
$Mxyz$. While this is suggestive, you should remember that terms in
the untyped lambda calculus do not have associated arities; so, for
the same term~$M$, it makes just as much sense to write $M(x,y)$ and
$M(x,y,z,w)$. But using this notation indicates that we are treating
$M$ as a function of three variables, and helps make the intentions
behind the definitions clearer. In a similar way, we will say ``define
$M$ by $M(x,y,z) = \dots$'' instead of ``define $M$ by $M =
\lambd[x][\lambd[y][\lambd[z][\dots]]]$.''

\end{document}
