% Part: biographies 
% Chapter: alfred-tarski 
% Section: biography
\documentclass[../../../include/open-logic-section]{subfiles}

\begin{document}

\olfileid{bio}{alt}{bio} 
\olsection{Biography}

\begin{figure}[h!] 
\centering
\includegraphics[scale=.75]{alfred-tarski.jpg} 
\caption{Alfred Tarski. Photo Credit: The New World Encyclopedia.}
 \end{figure}

Alfred Tarski was born on January 14, 1901 in Warsaw, Poland (then part of
the Russian Empire). In the realm of logic, his physical presence held no rival. 
Often
described as "Napoleonic," Tarski was boistrous, talkative, and intense.
His energy was often reflected in his lectures - he once set fire to a
wastebasket while disposing of a cigarette during a lecture, and was
forbidden from lecturing in that building again \citep[2]{feferman2004}.

Tarski had a thirst for knowledge from a young age. Although later in life
he would tell students that he studied logic because it was the only class
in which he got a B, his high school records show that he got A's across
the board - even in logic \citep[18]{feferman2004}. He studied at the
University of Warsaw from 1918 to 1924. Although intending to study
biology, he became interested in mathematics, philosophy and logic, as the
university introduced the Warsaw School of Logic and Philosophy
\cite[30]{feferman2004}. He earned his doctorate in 1924 under the
supervision of Stanis≈Çaw Le\"{s}niewski.

Before emigrating to the United States in 1939, Tarski completed some of
his most important work while working as a secondary school teacher in
Warsaw. His work on logical consequence and logical truth were written
during this time. In 1939, Tarski was visiting the United States for a
lecture tour, and because of his Jewish heritage, did not return before the
end of the war. His wife and children remained in Poland until the war
ended, and were able to emigrate to the United States as well. During his
time in the United States, Tarski taught at Harvard, the College of the
City of New York, and the Institute for Advanced Study. He was also a
founder of the multidisciplinary program in logic and the methodology of
science at the Univeristy of California, Berkeley. Tarski passed away in
1983 at the age of 82.

\begin{reading} 
\begin{itemize} 
\item For more on Tarski's life, see
\emph{Alfred Tarski: Life and Logic}, written by Anita and Solomon Feferman
\citep{feferman2004}.

\item Tarski's seminal works on logical consequence and truth are available
in \citet{tarski1983}.

\item All of Tarski's original works have been collected into a four volume
series. See \citet{Tarski1981}. 
\end{itemize} 
\end{reading}

\end{document}